+++
title = "The Marathon that Needs to Have a Negative Split"

date = 2019-04-13T00:00:00
lastmod = 2019-04-17T00:22:35
draft = false

# Authors. Comma separated list, e.g. `["Bob Smith", "David Jones"]`.
authors = ["MD Kamrul Islam"]

tags = ["Education" , "Technology" , "IELTS" , "CB Tests" , "Digitalization"]
summary = "Education and Technology – the terms have been going hand in hand for well over two decades. Millennials are well-acquainted with the necessity thanks to the numerous times they had to write on this topic on exams. But, how much of those ‘should do’-s in the write-ups have been done – that is an uncomfortable, yet much needed question to answer."

[header]
image = ""
caption = ""

+++

## Introduction

Midway through March British Council announced that IELTS will be joining the likes of GRE, GMAT and TOEFL by introducing computer-based test on Bangladeshi soil. IELTS CB Test has been in action since 2016 on 20 different countries. This proved the tests to be more convenient for both the script checkers and writers; making more test dates available according to the takers convenience and publishing results faster (within 5-7 days). Even though computer-based test method is a regular practice in most places around the globe, it is quite the news in a technologically unadvanced country like Bangladesh. However, IELTS on a computer does not take away the traditional pen and paper test format, rather it gives the test takers a choice. Regarding this, Sebastian Pearce, Director Examination, British Council in Bangladesh said, “It’s great to give candidates a choice of times and days. It’s also an opportunity for test takers to see our office at the Dhaka University campus.” 

The main objective behind this write up, however, is not the fact that gradually computer-based tests are gaining more and more popularity in the country, rather it is just the premise of the article. The focus of the article is to have a in depth look at how technology is acting as a trigger in the education sector, both inside and outside the border of Bangladesh. Keeping the focus at the back of our mind, we will dive deep into the relatively current situation of educational technology sector. 

## HOW BIG AN IMPACT DID TECHNOLOGY IMPOSE IN THE EDUCATION SECTOR?

Technology has turned into this ubiquitous figurine that, any and every field that comes to mind has a tangible or intangible effect due to technological advancement. So, the general answer of the mass would be “Yes, technology IS imposing changes in educational field”.  However, if we take a look at an illustration from the 14th century medieval Italy by Laurentius de Voltolina - the scene looks very familiar to us. The illustration depicts a classroom at University where the teacher is giving his lecture from a podium, some students from the front row are taking notes diligently, one or two dozed off, few gossiping. Appearance wise, education system is still the same as it was 600 years back, but it is the intrinsic details that has changed. Now instead of drawing figures in the classroom, teachers can show it through slides or even 3D modulators. Students now can take notes with their electronic devices; some lecture sheets are given before the class begins. Granted that the issue with gossiping and sleeping in class still remains, technology has managed to transform the educational field paramount none. We could go on and on about the boons of technology in modern life, but that would result in deviating from our primary focus and lengthening the article more than you would have the patience to sit for to read. Therefore, let us look at the present-day scenario in Bangladesh on Technology based Education. 

## HOW IS BANGLADESH DOING IN TERMS OF PROVIDING TECHNOLOGY BASED EDUCATION? 

Walking on the path titled as “Vision 2021” set by the Government back in 2008, Bangladesh has put a notable effort in incorporating the ICT sector with the education sector. As part of the program, Bangladesh now has an established platform on E-learning with organizations such as Jaago, 10 Minute School , Muktopaath. These organizations have been providing free online courses for school and college goers. The Government is working to ensure 100% internet connectivity throughout the country to make the E-Learning service available at minimum costs. Various training programs under the flag of “Teacher’s Training Program” are being conducted in association with Jaago foundation. A basic knowledge in Computer is now a prerequisite for teachers, as the ICT department of the Government is working on to provide a minimum of 1 Computer Center in each educational institute. Almost 80% of the Universities now have access to Multimedia Classrooms. As of 2015, 39.37% of the teachers and staffs in educational institutes have a basic ICT knowledge and the number is increasing even as we speak. The Government’s concern in making the education sector digitalized and at per with those of the developed countries is applaudable as we see an increase of 11% budget in education sector for the 2018-2019 fiscal year.
    

All these sound good enough to be an optimistic but comparing the current scenario of Bangladesh to those of the neighboring country, we are still at least 3 years lagging in terms of utilizing technology in Educational Field. Based on the youth literacy rate (between age 15 to 24), Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Nepal, Sri Lanka are 83.2%, 86.1%, 74.8%, 86.9%, 98.8% respectively whereas the world average is 91.2% (UNESCO list of countries by literacy rate (2015)). However, we would be wrong to judge the education sector’s effectiveness based on the literacy rate alone. Digitalization in education sector started back in 2002-03 in India and now they are witnessing a steady growth of 25% year-on-year on the E-Learning Industry. They have managed to bring 1.5 million schools and 18,000 higher education institutes under the digital umbrella. Sri Lanka holds the highest percentage in terms of Literacy Rate in the South East Asia region and for valid reasons. Back in 2006, Sri Lanka introduced a Wide Area Computer Network with 1200 schools named “SchoolNet” with the primary objective of ensuring a platform for school students and teaches to share learning resources. Today SchoolNet is the largest Computer Network in Sri Lanka connecting students and teachers from 1750(approx.) different schools all around Sri Lanka. In May 8, 2018, Sri Lanka signed a collaboration with Microsoft Organization headlined as TechEdu 2018 (Technology in Education)- showcasing technology used in classrooms to achieve better learning outcomes, was presented by E-W Information Systems Ltd (EWIS). 

These are just examples of what the neighboring countries did 10-15 years back, whereas Bangladesh has only seen implementation of these a few years back. The reason we drew comparison in the SEA region is because, comparing Bangladesh’s education system with the Western’s is too unfair a comparison to do, based on the socio –economic background. Except for India, most of the countries in South East Asia are similar in their economic and social lives. For Bangladesh, the silver lining is perhaps that, we started, we are late, but we started the marathon.

## IT’S NOT A SPRINT, IT’S A MARATHON WITH NO FINISH LINE

There is no finishing rope in education sector’s development to lean forward our chest to. It is a constant struggle. The truth of the matter is, Bangladesh’s education system is just a lousy imitation of the western system. We need to understand that, not everything that is happening in the west is a checkpoint for us to reach, rather it is just a benchmark. Progress varies region to region, so instead of blindly forcing to implement what others are doing, we need to come up with a solution that is compatible to our region. The education system needs to change, in accordance to the modern technology, with a foresight; something that most of the figures in authority seem to lack. 

Madrasa and Primary Schools in Bangladesh have zero connectivity, these young minds need to be nurtured with proper technological knowledge, as this is the optimum time for them to learn. The Higher Secondary schools and Colleges have around 40% access to internet and multimedia classroom, but a mere 2.13% of the teachers there are used to multimedia classrooms. Yet, on paper, 37.64% of the college and higher secondary teachers have been given ICT and multimedia classroom training. Nonetheless, they are still opting out for the chalk and blackboard as teaching materials. These training programs have turned into an excursion where the teachers go for the free meals and sightseeing. Unless and until teachers implement their acquired ICT knowledge in the classroom, the training programs are pointless. Having an ICT teacher who shows how to open a product in Microsoft Office, to type a few words and to perform some of the basic actions is not enough. We are currently in the age of Millennials; they have the potential to do much more. These basic knowledges are something they can learn in elementary schools. 

After spending 18 years of life with pen and paper, the students suddenly get hit by online submissions, presentations, programming, coding, photoshops and as such. Even though, 80% of the universities in Bangladesh has access to internet and computer center, but the traditional pen and paper method still remains at large. Don’t get me wrong, it’s not that I am saying that pen and paper method is bad, no it is good, but it’s becoming more and more outdated. The future is of virtual reality with voice commands. The Government and each and every one of us, need to carry out our part. The Government needs to come up with a secure learning portal where students and teachers can share learning resources. a2i can play an important role in this aspect. As part of the ‘VISION 2021’, a2i has been moving towards connecting the whole map within a digital platform, where information is easily accessible. Nearly at the end of 2016, a2i program has integrated education as their concern stating, “We need to digitalize our higher education”. 

You may be wondering, what did IELTS now having an option for computer-based test have to do anything with what I have said. It gave me hope; what some may refer as a pipe dream. A hope that ‘Digital Bangladesh’ – the catchphrase that has become a sarcastic expression – might not be too far away. We definitely have a lot to do, a lot of mistakes to amend and more than a lot of dedication to offer, but if we want to see Bangladesh, among the lit of developed countries, the education system needs to be reformed and be compatible with the era and Generation Y. All that I implore is, we may have started far after the gun shot in the marathon but let us make sure we catch up to the race leaders. 
